#14 Maya v1.0.0 Simshape docs (#26)
Inbibo/adonisfx_docs: docs/documentation/maya/simshape.md

> # Introduction to Simshape in Maya

Reviewer: Done.

**Simshape** is a Maya deformer to get facial simulation in the animation rig of an asset. Given a facial expression, the deformer is able to compute the activation of the vertices in order to emulate the changes in the rigidity of the skin. As result, the dynamics of the simulated skin mimic the behaviour of internal muscles contracting.

During the simulation, the solver reduces the inertias of the vertices with higher values of activation, while it computes standard simulation in the vertices that are not activated. One of the key features of Simshape is the ability to extract muscle information directly from the neutral geometry and the set of deformed geometries with the facial expressions using Machine Learning techniques.

> ## Requirements

Reviewer: I am seeing that Collider and Rest Collider are explained in detail below but don't you think we should also add them to this list of requirements? If we finally add it I think it would be good to mention that these two meshes must have the same number of vertices but it can be different from the number of vertices of the other 4 inputs.

Reviewer 2: Please, check that these comments have been addressed and take note if we have to add similar comments for other deformers/doc pages

The Simshape deformer has a series of input meshes to be provided:

>   - <b class="mesh_color"> Rest Mesh (R) </b> with no deformation or animation. (optional) 

Reviewer: Done.

# AdnSimshape

AdnSimshape is a Maya deformer to produce facial simulation in the animation rig of an asset. Given a facial expression, the deformer is able to compute the activation of the vertices in order to emulate the changes in the rigidity of the skin. As result, the dynamics of the simulated skin mimic the behaviour of internal muscles contracting.

During simulation, the solver reduces the inertias of the vertices with higher values of activation, while it computes standard simulation in the vertices that are not activated. One of the key features of AdnSimshape is the ability to extract muscle information directly from the neutral geometry and the set of deformed geometries with the facial expressions using Machine Learning techniques.

## How to Use

> The AdnSimshape deformer is of great simplicity to set up and apply to a mesh within a Maya scene. The combination of a rest mesh, deform mesh and animated mesh allow the system to compute activation values which would drive the behaviour and inertias of the output skin mesh (simulated mesh).

Reviewer 2: This is for AdnSkin. Please write there the following:

`The AdnSkin deformer is of great simplicity to set up and apply to a mesh within a Maya scene. The way this deformer works is by applying simulation on top of the skin mesh (simulated mesh) which will be directly coupled to its reference mesh (with deformation over time).`

Reviewer 2: Done in Ribbon PR

> - If <b class="mesh_color">R</b> is not provided, the system will use the initial state of <b class="mesh_color">S</b> as the rest mesh.
> - If <b class="mesh_color">D</b> is not provided, the simulation will not produce activations.
> - If <b class="mesh_color">A</b> is not provided, the system will use the input mesh to the deformer (<b class="mesh_color">S</b>) as animated mesh.

## Create AdnSimshape

When initially creating an AdnSimshape deformer, it is possible to add both a **Simulated Mesh** and a **Rest Mesh**, or only add a **Simulated Mesh**. The process to create an AdnSimshape deformer is the following:

  1. Select the **Rest Mesh** (optional), then the **Simulated Mesh**.
        
    - Remember that the deformer can be applied to the **Animated Mesh** and use it directly as the **Simulated Mesh**.

  2. Press the ![Simshape button](images/adn_simshape.png) in the AdonisFX shelf or press *Simshape* in AdonisFX menu under the *Create* section. If the shelf button is double-clicked or the option box in the menu is selected a window will be displayed where a custom name and initial attribute values can be set.

>   3. A message box will notify you that AdnSimshape has been created properly, meaning that it is ready to simulate with default settings. Check the [attributes section](#attributes) to customize the configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3. A message box will notify that AdnSimshape has been created properly, meaning that it is ready to simulate with default settings. Check the [attributes section](#attributes) to customize the configuration.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

In order to add or remove any of those optional meshes, a set of menu items are exposed in AdonisFX menu > *Edit Simshape*. In that submenu, we can find the options to manage each mesh type as we present in the Figure 1.

<figure style="width:45%" markdown>

>   ![*Edit Simshape* submenu](images/simshape_menu.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ![Edit Simshape submenu](images/simshape_menu.png)
```

Reviewer 2: Done

  <figcaption><b>Figure 1:</b> *Edit Simshape* submenu.</figcaption>
</figure>

To add any of these meshes to AdnSimshape, follow a similar procedure to when first creating the deformer:

  1. Select the meshes in the following order:

>     **Additional Mesh** &#8594 **Simulated mesh**

Reviewer 2: Done

        
  2. Press the corresponding menu element in AdonisFX menu > *Edit Simshape*.

>   3. A message box will notify you that the action has been successful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3. A message box will notify that the action has been successful.
```

To remove any of these meshes from AdnSimshape follow this procedure:

  1. Select only the mesh with AdnSimshape applied.
  2. Press the corresponding menu element in AdonisFX menu > *Edit Simshape*.

>   3. A message box will notify you that the action has been successful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3. A message box will notify that the action has been successful.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

     - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\]. Upper limit is soft, higher values can be used.

#### Muscles Activation Settings
 - **Activation Mode** (Enumerator, "No Activation"): Mode to drive the muscle activations. There are 3 different modes:
    - Muscle Patches (Disabled by default): An Adonis Muscle Patches file (.amp) has to be provided to enable this option.
    - Plug Values (Disabled by default): The attribute values ActivationList.Activation should be populated to enable this option. The activation data will be read from the plug values.
    - No Activation (Enabled by default): No activation is read.
 - **Muscle Patches File** (String, ""): Path to the Adonis Muscle Patches file (.amp).
 - **Activation Smoothing** (Integer, 1): Number of iterations for the activation smoothing algorithm. The greater the number, the smoother the activations per patch will be.
     - Has a range of \[1, 20\]. Upper limit is soft, higher values can be used.
 - **Bidirectional Activation** (Boolean, False): Flag to enable muscle activations in the positive and negative directions of the muscle patches fibers.

>  - **Write Out Activations** (Boolean, False): Flag to toggle the writing of activations into an output plug.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - **Write Out Activation** (Boolean, False): Flag to toggle the writing of activations into an output plug.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

## Create Simshape

> When initially creating a Simshape deformer me may add directly a rest mesh or apply it diretly with a single mesh selected. The required process is as follows:

Author: I do prefer this wording, less confusing.

> When initially creating a Simshape deformer me may add directly a rest mesh or apply it diretly with a single mesh selected. The required process is as follows:

Reviewer: Done.

  1. Select the meshes in the following order: **Rest Mesh** (optional) &#8594 **Simulated mesh**
        

>     - Remember that the animated mesh will be used directly as the simulation mesh when no animation mesh is provided.

Author: Hmm I get the confusion, it was meant to imply that we can use the animation mesh as the simulation mesh. Maybe this wording is better:

 - Remember that we may aplly the deformer to the animation mesh and use it directly as the simulation mesh.

  1. Select only the mesh with simshape applied.
  2. Press the corresponding menu element in AdonisFX menu > Edit Simshape.
  3. A message box will notify you that the action has been successful.

# Attributes

[^1]: Soft range: higher values can be used.

#### Solver Attributes
 - **Enable** (Boolean, True): Flag to enable or disable the deformer computation.
 - **Iterations** (Integer, 3): Number of iterations that the solver will execute per simulation step. Greater values mean greater computational cost.
     - Has a range of \[1, 10\] [^1]
 - **Material** (Enumerator, Leather): Solver stiffness presets per material. The materials are listed from lowest to highest stiffness. There are 7 different presets:
    <ul><li>Fat: 10^7^</li><li>Muscle: 5e^3^</li><li>Rubber: 10^6^</li><li>Tendon: 5e^7^</li><li>Leather: 10^8^</li><li>Wood: 6e^9^</li><li>Concrete: 2.5e^10^</li></ul>
 - **Stiffness Multiplier** (Float, 1.0): Multiplier factor to scale up or down the material stiffness.
     - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\]

#### Muscles Activation Settings
 - **Activation Mode** (Enumerator, No Activation): Mode to drive the muscle activations. There are 3 different modes:

>     - *Muscle Patches* (Disabled by default): An Adonis Muscle Patches file (.amp) has to be provided to enable this option.

Reviewer: I see the .amp file is explained below so we could add a link to that section here if you agree.

>     - *Muscle Patches* (Disabled by default): An Adonis Muscle Patches file (.amp) has to be provided to enable this option.

Author: Yes! I believe that the "(.amp)" could be set as a link to that section.

    - *Plug Values* (Disabled by default): The attribute values ActivationList.Activation should be populated to enable this option. The activation data will be read from the plug values.

>     - *No Activation* No activation is read.

Author: True! Thank you for noticing that

>     - *No Activation* No activation is read.

Reviewer: Done.

 - **Muscle Patches File** (String): Path to the Adonis Muscle Patches file (.amp).
 - **Activation Smoothing** (Integer, 1): Number of iterations for the activation smoothing algorithm. The greater the number, the smoother the activations per patch will be.
     - Has a range of \[1, 20\] [^1]
 - **Bidirectional Activation** (Boolean, False): Flag to enable muscle activations in the positive and negative directions of the muscle patches fibers.

>  - **Write Out Actiavations** (Boolean, False): Flag to toggle the writing of activations into a point attribute.

Author: You're right! It should be like this.

```suggestion
 - **Write Out Actiavations** (Boolean, False): Flag to toggle the writing of activations into an output plug.
```

>  - **Write Out Actiavations** (Boolean, False): Flag to toggle the writing of activations into a point attribute.

Reviewer: Done.

#### Time Attributes
 - **Preroll Start Time** (Time, *Current frame*): Sets the frame at which the preroll begins. The preroll ends at *Start Time*.
 - **Start Time** (Time, *Current frame*): Determines the frame at which the simulation starts.
 - **Current Time** (Time, *Current frame*): Current playback frame.

#### Scale Attributes
 - **Time Scale** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the simulation time step.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\] [^1]
 - **Space Scale** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the masses and/or the forces.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\] [^1]

#### Gravity
 - **Gravity** (Float, 1.0): Sets the magnitude of the gravity acceleration.
 - **Space Scale** (Float3, {0.0. -1.0, 0.0} ): Sets the scaling factor applied to the masses and/or the forces.
    - Vectors introduced don't need to be normalized, but they will get normalized internally.

### Advanced Settings

#### Stiffness Settings
 - **Use Custom Stiffness** (Boolean, False): Toggles the use of a custom stiffness value. If enabled, the Material is ignored and the Stiffness parameter is used instead.

>     - If we use a custom stiffness, **Material** and **Stiffness Multiplier** will be disabled and **Stiffness** will be used instead.

Author: Yes! It is redundant otherwise, thank you for noticing.

>     - If we use a custom stiffness, **Material** and **Stiffness Multiplier** will be disabled and **Stiffness** will be used instead.

Reviewer: Done.

 - **Stiffness** (Float, 10^5^): Sets the custom stiffness value.
    - Its value must be greater than 0.0.

#### Dynamic Properties
 - **Global Mass Multiplier** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the mass of every point.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 10.0\] [^1]
 - **Global Damping** (Float, 0.75): Sets the scaling factor applied to the global damping of every point.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 1.0\] [^1]
 - **Inertia Damper** (Float, 0.0): Sets the linear damping applied to the dynamics of every point.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 1.0\] [^1]
 - **Rest Length Multiplier** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the edge lengths at rest.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\] [^1]
 - **Compression Multiplier** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the compression resistance of every point.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\] [^1]
 - **Stretching Multiplier** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the stretching resistance of every point.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\] [^1]

>  - **Attenuation Velocity factor** (Float, 1.0): Sets the weight of the attenuation applied to the whole simulation driven by the Attenuation Matrix.

Author: I see... You are right, being more specific sounds like a good idea.

Also, yes! As in AdnSkin, I believe it should be defined as an additional attribute, as it is not present in the attribute editor.

    - Has a range of \[0.0, 10.0\] [^1]

#### Collision Settings
 - **Compute Collisions** (Boolean, True): Flag to enable collisions correction in the deformer. If disabled, the deformer will ignore colliders when deforming the mesh.
 - **Keep Orientation** (Boolean, True): Flag to preserve the initial orientation of the vertices relative to the collider when handling collisions. If disabled, the mesh will suffer no changes if the orientation of the collider varies.
 - **Max Sliding Distance** (Float, 1.0): Maximum distance (in world units) the simulated vertex is allowed to slide relative to the collider.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 10.0\] [^1]

#### Attraction Settings

>  - **Attraction Multiplier** (Float, 1.0): Maximum distance (in world units) the simulated vertex is allowed to slide relative to the collider.

Reviewer: I think this definition corresponds to Max Sliding Distance instead of Attraction Multiplier.

Author: My bad, yes! The definition should be:
```suggestion
 - **Attraction Multiplier** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the Attraction.
```

Also, the range should be corrected for it to be a soft max of 2.0

    - Has a range of \[0.0, 10.0\] [^1]
 - **Attraction Remap Mode** (Enumerator, Cube Root): Remap mode used to compute the definitive attraction values. There are 4 different modes that folow different remap methods:
    <ul><li>Linear</li><li>Logarithmic</li><li>Square Root</li><li>Cube Root</li></ul>

#### Initialization Settings
 - **Animatable Rest Mesh** (Boolean, False): Flag that enables reading animated rest mesh data.
 - **Initialize to Anim Mesh** (Boolean, True): Flag to instantiate points at animated mesh instead of rest mesh on initialization.

#### Activation Remap
 - **Activation Remap** (Ramp Attribute): Curve to remap the activation values.

> ## Paintable Weights

Reviewer: I notice in this section and elsewhere in the documentation that sometimes capital letters are used and sometimes lower case letters are used after colons. I think we should follow the same criteria to maintain consistency throughout the documentation.

Author: You are right! I believe lower case is more correct after semicolon.

Similar to using italics when referencing attributes, this is something we should do a full review of throughout the documentation. I will take note of this for future reference.

Reviewer: Added capital letters when the colon introduces a complete sentence.

#### Scale Attributes
 - **Time Scale** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the simulation time step.
    - Has a range of \[0.0, 2.0\]. Upper limit is soft, higher values can be used.

>  - **Space Scale** (Float, 1.0): Sets the scaling factor applied to the masses and/or the forces.

Reviewer 2: We have to add the missing `Space Scale` mode. Copy it from AdnSkin

Reviewer 2: Done

#### Activation Remap
 - **Activation Remap** (Ramp Attribute): Curve to remap the activation values.

### Debug attributes

 - **Debug** (Boolean, False): Enable or Disable the debug functionalities in the viewport for the AdnSimshape deformer.
 - **Feature** (Enumerator, "Collision Constraints"): A list of debuggable features for this deformer.
     - Collision Constraints: Draw *Collision Constraints* connections from the simulated mesh to the collider mesh.
     - Muscle Fibers: Draw *Muscle Fibers* on the simulated mesh.
 - **Width Scale** (Float, 3.0): Modifies the width of all lines.
 - **Color** (Color picker): Selects the line color from a color wheel. Its saturation can be modified using the slider.
 - **Fiber scale value**: can be modified to set a custom fiber length.

### Connectable attributes
 - **Anim Mesh** (Mesh): Animated mesh on which to apply the simulation to.
 - **Attenuation Matrix** (Matrix, Identity): Transformation matrix to drive the attenuation.

>  - **Collision Mesh Matrix** (Matrix, Identity): Collision matrix used to drive the collision logic.

Reviewer 2: Done

    - The debug lines will only be displayed in case collisions are enabled and colliders have been set up.
 - **Muscle Fibers**: For each vertex, a line will be drawn showing the direction of the muscle fibers.
    - The debug lines will only be displayed in case muscle activations have been enabled with an Adonis Muscle Patches file.

Enabling the debugger and selecting one of these constraints will draw lines from the influenced vertices in the simulated mesh to their corresponding reference vertices. 

<!-- We might want to add a screenshot here of a debug functionality like fibers -->

# Advanced

## Muscle Activations
AdnSimshape can emulate the behaviour of facial muscles by computing the muscle activation directly on the vertices of the skin geometry. The activation of the vertices is an advanced and optional feature that can work in two modes: from **muscle patches data** or from **plug values**.

<figure markdown>
  ![Activation modes from attribute editor](images/activation_modes.png)
  <figcaption><b>Figure 5:</b> Activation Modes switch exposed in the Attribute Editor</figcaption>
</figure>

> !!! abstract "Activations Modes"

Reviewer 2: Replace `[this section](#generate-muscle-patches)` with `[generate muscle patches section](#generate-muscle-patches)`

Reviewer 2: Done

>         Activations are not computed. This option is selected by default.

Reviewer: Should be this line here?

Author: I am not sure I follow here, why shouldn't this line be here?

Additional custom settings for the learning algorithm:

>  - **Limit Iterations** (Boolean, False): If enabled, the "Number of iterations" will be taken into consideration.

Reviewer: I see that sometimes to make reference to an attribute it is wrapped in quotation marks, other times italic style is used and other times bold style, I think we should follow the same criteria to reference attributes.

Author: You are right. I believe out of these three options the most adequate is the italic style. We shoul do in the near future a check through all pages to be consistent with this.

Reviewer: Removed bold or italic style from references to attributes.

##### Requirements

  - **Neutral mesh**: Rest mesh with a neutral facial expression.
  - **Target meshes**: Set of deformed meshes representing facial expresions.

>   - The number of vertices in the neutral and the target meshes must match with the number of vertices of the Simulated mesh that will be used for the simulation.

Reviewer 2: We might want to tab this

The AMP file is generated from the Learn Muscle Patches tool:

<figure style="float: right; width: 40%; padding-left: 5px;">
  <img src="images/simshape_ml_window.png" caption="Learn Muscle Patches UI"> 
  <figcaption><b>Figure 6:</b> Learn Muscle Patches UI</figcaption>
</figure>

> 1. Open the **Learn Muscle Patches UI**. Using the shelf button ![Learn Muscle Patches icon](images/adn_learn_muscle_patches.png) or go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press **Learn Muscle Patches UI**.

Reviewer 2: Review where `**` instead of `""` are required

Reviewer 2: Done

### Debug Activations

AdnSimshape integrates a debug mode to visualize the activations during the simulation. If this mode is enabled, then AdnSimshape will display a map of vertex colors from black to red on the simulation mesh where the black color is mapped to no activation and the red color is mapped to maximum activation.

<figure style="width: 30%" markdown>
  ![Learn Muscle Patches UI window](images/nassim_debug.png)
  <figcaption><b>Figure 8:</b> Example of AdnSimshape running in Debug mode</figcaption>
</figure>

In order to toggle and untoggle the debug mode, follow these steps:

1. Stop the simulation.
2. Move to pre-roll frame or start frame.

> 3. Press ![Simshape debug icon](images/adn_simshape_debugger.png) or go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press **Activations Debugger**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Press ![Simshape debug icon](images/adn_simshape_debugger.png) or go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press *Activations Debugger*.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

## Colliders

AdnSimshape supports an internal collider that has to be bound to the rig and combined into a single object in order to mimic the internal structures like the skull or the teeth.

### Add Collider

1. Select the collider object.
2. Select the mesh with the AdnSimshape deformer.

> 3. Press the AdonisFX Shelf > Add Collider Shelf Button ![Add collider icon](images/adn_add_collider.png) or go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press **Add Collider**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Press the AdonisFX Shelf > *Add Collider Shelf Button* ![Add collider icon](images/adn_add_collider.png) or go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press *Add Collider*. 
```

Reviewer 2: Done

  ![Collision threshold paint example](images/collision_threshold_paint_example.png) 
  <figcaption>Figure 6: Collision Threshold Multiplier painted values to 0.2 for the whole mesh.</figcaption> 
</figure>

## Debugger

To better visualize deformer constraints and attributes in the Maya viewport there is the option to enable the debugger, found in the dropdown menu labeled "Debug" in the attribute editor.

> To enable the debugger the *Debug* checkbox must be marked.To select the specific feature you would like to visualize, choose it from the list provided in *Features*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the debugger the *Debug* checkbox must be marked. To select the specific feature you would like to visualize, choose it from the list provided in *Features*. 
```

Reviewer: Done.

### Remove Collider

1. Select the collider object.
2. Select the mesh with the AdnSimshape deformer.

> 3. Press the AdonisFX Shelf > Remove Collider Shelf Button ![Remove collider icon](images/adn_remove_collider.png) or go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press **Remove Collider**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Press the AdonisFX Shelf > *Remove Collider* Shelf Button ![Remove collider icon](images/adn_remove_collider.png) or go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press *Remove Collider*.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

### Add Rest Collider

The use of rest collider is recommended when the preroll simulation is not computed and the [initialization to the animated mesh](#initialization-settings) is enabled. In order to allow the solver to build consistent collision data in those cases, we should provide both the [rest mesh](#requirements) and the rest collider.

1. Select the rest collider object.
2. Select the mesh with the AdnSimshape deformer.

> 3. Go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press **Add Rest Collider**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press *Add Rest Collider*.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

### Remove Rest Collider

1. Select the rest collider object.
2. Select the mesh with the AdnSimshape deformer.

> 3. Go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press **Remove Rest Collider**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Go to the *Edit Simshape* submenu from the AdonisFX menu and press *Remove Rest Collider*.
```

Reviewer 2: Done
